Jane Austen explores the consequences of the absence of love in marriage in her novel Pride and Prejudice. As a realistic novel of manners, the novel attempts to depict and criticize the loveless marriages of convenience so common in Victorian England. Austen examines the consequences of such practical but lukewarm pairings in Pride and Prejudice; in the novel, marriages without love create a lifetime of unhappiness for those involved. Lack of love in these marriages cause instability in the family and ultimately impair the children. In Pride and Prejudice, the consequences of a loveless marriage extend beyond the husband and wife and harm the next generation.	Because Mr. Bennet married his wife for superficial reasons rather than love, their marriage grows into one of disrespect and avoidance. Elizabeth reflects, “Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for her” (Austen 202). As Mr. Bennet’s affection for Mrs. Bennet waned, he lost all respect for her. In the novel, he sees her only as a source of entertainment; the narrator notes, “To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement” (202).  After Mrs. Bennet begs him to go meet Mr. Bingley when he moves to town, he refuses to do so to her face but resolves to do so in secret.  When he finally tells his family that he has visited Mr. Bingley, “the astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished” and Mrs. Bennet’s surprise “perhaps surpass[ed] the rest” (5). This seemingly insignificant joke Mr. Bennet plays on his family evinces his true character and the nature of his marriage—he chooses to vex his wife for his own amusement rather than communicate with her and respect her. Moreover, Mr. Bennet frequently demeans his wife.  When Mrs. Bennet excitedly tells him about the ball she attended and the women with whom Mr. Bingley danced, a topic very important to her, Mr. Bennet sneers, “If he had had any compassion for me… he would have not danced half so much! …say no more of his partners” (10). In this instance, instead of listening to and supporting his wife, he demonstrates an impatience with her that is typical of their relationship. When Mr. Bennet is not using his wife for entertainment or belittling her, he locks himself away from his wife in his library, where “he had been always sure of leisure and tranquility; and though prepared… to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the house, he was used to be free from them there” (61). His library ultimately allows him to avoid interacting with his annoying wife. Thus, the disdain and avoidance featured in Mr. Bennet’s relationship with his wife are products of their superficial, loveless marriage.	The lack of love in the Bennet’s marriage creates instability in the family and causes Mr. Bennet to avoid his parental responsibilities. Mr. Bennet’s constant demeaning of his wife and disregard for her opinion creates an imbalance in the familial structure that is demonstrated after Mrs. Bennet demands Elizabeth marry Mr. Collins. In her argument with Elizabeth, Mrs. Bennet seeks her husband’s support, but instead he undermines her authority when he remarks, “An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents. —Your mother will never see you again if you do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again if you do” (97). In this instance, Mr. Bennet forces Elizabeth to choose between himself and his wife, adding instability to his family’s dynamic. Additionally, the time Mr. Bennet spends in his library avoiding his wife adds to the volatility of his family. In his library, he is not an active member of his household, and therefore not engaged in the upbringing of his daughters, leaving them vulnerable to the vanity and ignorance of Mrs. Bennet. Lydia and Kitty, his youngest daughters, are especially susceptible to Mrs. Bennet’s foolishness; like their mother, they are both very flirtatious. When a militia regiment arrives, Lydia and Kitty “could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr. Bingley’s large fortune… was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign” (23). Instead of reminding the girls that such flirtation is empty and not a way to foster a real relationship, Mr. Bennet merely observes, “From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the country…” (23).   Mr. Bennet does little to reprimand them or seriously talk to them because their similarities to their mother, whom he does not respect or love, cause him to shirk his responsibilities toward them. Lydia and Kitty’s similarities with their mother are obvious after the soldiers leave Meryton. The two are very upset about their loss of the company of the soldiers, and Mrs. Bennet empathizes with them by mentioning, “I cried for two days together when Colonel Millar’s regiment went away” (198). Consequentially, Mr. Bennet inattentively allows Lydia and Kitty to run amuck and flirt voraciously with the militia regiment in Meryton. Elizabeth notices the effect of her parent’s loveless marriage on her younger sisters when the narrator notes, “…she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage…” (203). Thus, the absence of love in Mr. Bennet’s marriage creates imbalance in his family’s structure and leads him to avoid his duties toward Lydia and Kitty. 	The familial strife created by the Bennet’s loveless marriage and Mr. Bennet’s careless parenting set Lydia up for failure. Both Kitty and Lydia are very similar to their mother and therefore relatively neglected by their father, but by the end of the novel, Kitty is saved from Lydia’s foolishness by being “removed from the influence of Lydia’s example” (332).  Lydia, however, is not so fortunate. Mr. Bennet’s lack of care for his wife and daughters prevents him from making the right decision when Mrs. Foster invites Lydia to stay with her in Brighton, where the militia regiment moved. Elizabeth warns him not to allow Lydia to go when she asserts, “If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment… she will… be the most determined flirt…” (198). However, Mr. Bennet selfishly responds, “We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to Brighton” (198). Mr. Bennet’s decision to allow Lydia to stay with the Foster’s in Brighton allows her to cavort freely with Mr. Wickham and eventually run away with him, bringing shame to the entire family. Both Mr. Bennet and Mr. Gardiner go to London to try to find them, but Mr. Bennet soon gives up the hunt and goes home without discovering Lydia because he is “rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavors” (254). However, his lack of persistence in finding Lydia marks another failure that burdens his family; if Lydia is not found and forced to marry Wickham, the family will suffer a scandal that will more than likely prevent the rest of daughters from marrying. Depressed and recognizing that he failed Lydia and his family, Mr. Bennet rejects Elizabeth’s comfort, lamenting, “No Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression... Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my library, in my night-cap and powering gown, and give as much trouble as I can…” (255).  Austen drives that fact that the Bennet’s loveless marriage has prevented Lydia from being properly raised when she returns to Longbourn with Wickham with absolutely no sense of shame or embarrassment; she is so insolent that she tells Jane, “Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married woman” (270). In the end, due to the lack of respect within her parent’s loveless marriage, Lydia is left in a loveless marriage of her own.  Just as Mr. Bennet’s complete lack of regard for his wife is evident, Wickham’s lack of regard for Lydia evinces itself by the end of the novel.  The narrator mentions, “[Wickham’s] affection for [Lydia] soon sunk into indifference; hers lasted a little longer” (333).  Ultimately, the lack of love in the Bennet’s marriage fails Lydia.	In the end, loveless marriage in Pride and Prejudice impairs both the spouses and their children. Mr. and Mrs. Bennet’s foolish marriage leads him to resent his wife and disengage from his family. Because his two youngest daughters Lydia and Kitty are so like his wife, he disrespects them both by ignoring his parental duties toward them and belittling his wife. Thus, without ever being reprimanded for her coquettishness, Lydia unabashedly and foolishly elopes with Wickham, bringing shame on her family and trapping herself in a loveless marriage. Overall, Austen uses this scandalous and tragic outcome of the Bennet’s loveless marriage to contribute to her social commentary against marriage without love.  Austen ultimately argues that such marriages not only create a lifetime of unhappiness for the spouses, but also generate a cycle of miserable, loveless marriages that is passed down to the children.